Analyse Agile Software Development Teamwork Productivity using Qualitative 
System Dynamics Approach 
 
Israt Fatema 
Institute of Information Technology  
University of Dhaka 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
email: mph001@iit.du.ac.bd 
Kazi Muheymin Us Sakib 
Institute of Information Technology  
University of Dhaka 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
email: sakib@iit.du.ac.bd 
 
 
Abstract—A highly productive team throughout an agile 
software development process is very instrumental in achieving 
project success. This research presents a system dynamics (SD) 
based approach to model agile software development 
teamwork productivity by analyzing productivity influence 
factors. Identification of main factors influencing productivity 
and how they impact agile teamwork are carried out through 
interviews, survey and literature review. A study has been 
conducted on seventeen software companies in Bangladesh. 
From the perspective of agile team members, the four most 
perceived factors impacting on their productivity are team 
effectiveness, team management, motivation and customer 
satisfaction. Lack of management support is found to be the 
most mentioned reason for failed agile project. The findings 
from these sources are compiled into a Causal Loop Diagram 
(CLD) for qualitative analysis of the teamwork productivity 
influencing factors. The resulting qualitative model is expected 
to provide more insight into the agile teamwork dynamics and 
establish a basis for a further quantitative modelling. Using the 
proposed model, the project manager may find the origin of a 
decrease in productivity, evaluate management strategies along 
with their effects on teamwork productivity. The future step 
will be the dynamic simulation of the teamwork productivity 
model based on the qualitative model in this paper.  
Keywords-agile teamwork productivity; influence factors; 
qualitative system dynamics; team effectiveness. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
The objective of any software company is to be efficient 
and achieve maximum team productivity by being cost 
effective and reducing development time. A highly 
productive team is the most important factor in achieving 
project success at different stages of an agile software 
development. For efficient management and a better control 
over the agile project team, it is important to understand the 
team dynamics and effects related to agile practices that 
influence the development team’s productivity.  
Research has been largely carried out to identify factors 
that contribute and influence productivity in traditional 
software development. There are four main factors generally 
discussed [1]: the product being developed (characterization 
of the specific software), people (team members, 
capabilities, experience, motivation), project (management 
and resourcing) and processes (tools and software methods). 
However, agile teamwork productivity is a function of 
various controllable and uncontrollable factors [2]. The 
relationships between some of these factors and productivity 
may change under new software engineering practice and 
culture [3]. The factors change over time as expectations 
change. The software industry is also different from country 
to country as are the resource availability, the laws which 
govern it and the developer’s cost [4]. In addition, actual 
productivity measurement becomes more difficult when 
agile software developers perform knowledge-related tasks 
(e.g., creating, storing, sorting, retrieving, applying and 
acquiring knowledge) where the product is usually 
intangible, rarely has single way of doing it, and it is 
difficult to quantify [2]. Since knowledge is complex and 
hard to evaluate, it is difficult to interpret the productivity of 
the agile team member’s simply by source line of code 
(SLOC) or function points produced per unit of time/cost 
[3].  
Despite the increasing acceptance of the agile methods, 
insufficient research has been empirical on the effect of 
software development productivity [5]. A better knowledge 
of the factors and the mediators that influence agile 
teamwork productivity could help determine where 
management efforts would be focused to improve 
productivity. Agile team members also should learn to 
interpret and manage productivity factors regularly as they 
are self-managed. The researchers have highlighted the 
value of team learning to help organization achieving team 
effectiveness, better ways to solve problem and increased 
productivity.  
Since the agile project team is the most dynamic element 
in the software development sector, improving team 
productivity has become a target for software companies in 
everywhere. The aim of this study is to analyse and 
understand the complex interdependences and underlying 
structures at the team’s perception level, which influence 
agile teamwork productivity over time. This paper 
determines the major factors impacting teamwork 
productivity in Bangladeshi software companies through a 
survey and interviews that have been conducted with agile 
teams to rank the most influential ones among them. The 
major factors are to be modelled using a qualitative SD 
approach. This conceptual model will be used to examine 
the internal dynamics existed within the team and the 
60Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
organizational resources that are used to support them. The 
future contribution of this research shall provide a strategic 
(quantitative) model that tells the project manager in 
advance about the degree of impact these factors will have 
on teamwork and may identify the origin of a decrease in 
productivity. Therefore, the agile teamwork productivity 
may be improved by implementation of management 
strategies. The scope of this empirical findings considers the 
Bangladeshi software companies as a case study, which can 
in turn make the research results beneficial to these 
companies. However, it is thought that other countries will 
follow a similar affect to those identified here and its results 
could be generalized by following the proposed model.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II includes a literature review, section III presents 
the research method and design. Section IV describes the 
survey results and Section V explores the structure of the 
qualitative SD model. Section VI describes some limitations 
of this work. Finally, Section VII describes the conclusion 
and future work. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
There are several studies that attempted to assess the 
impact of some of the influencing factors on agile teamwork 
productivity. Only Melo et.al [2] analysed the major factors 
influencing agile teamwork productivity using the team’s 
perception as one potential dimension to understand their 
overall productivity. Through perceptions, they found that 
team management is the most influencing factor on agile 
team productivity. SD technique has been applied in 
software engineering fields for modelling purposes, which is 
important for the organization and the project. There are few 
researches [6][7][8] that attempted to evaluate the impact of 
some of the influencing factors on productivity separately 
using SD. However, the complex inter-related structure of 
all the major factors effecting the teamwork productivity 
was not considered by the previous works. Abdel-Ahmed 
[7] investigated the effect of various management policies 
on development cycle time, quality and effort. His works 
however adopt the waterfall method which limits their 
applicability in recent software project and more 
importantly, does not focus on the agile principles. 
 In addition, evaluation of individual productivity may 
not affect the productivity of other team members [9]. These 
ideas provide a motivation to study teams’ productivity, not 
individuals. A number of studies exist on teamwork in agile 
software development on a range of topics relevant to 
composition of team [10], task-effective norms in teams 
[11], team member’s motivation [12], and the importance of 
a team vision. Yet others have focused on team’s 
communication [10], decision making [13] and self-
management [10]. 
Another stream of research has focused on team 
performance in agile software development to analyse the 
teamwork. Team performance refers to evaluation of the 
results of the teamwork. Moe et al. used two team 
performance models to explain teamwork in a project 
adopting Scrum: The Salas et al. model [14] and the 
Dickenson McIntyre model [15]. Melo et al. used the ‘Input 
Process Output’ model to identify team productivity factors 
in a multiple case studies. Dingsoyr et al. [16] described 
agile software development as a sociotechnical system 
comprised of human (socio) and technical entities. 
Technological interventions do not increase sociotechnical 
system effectiveness if they are not supported by social 
(self-managing team and group) components of the system. 
Such team interactions are one of the important parts in 
software development. Thus, recent focus on agile software 
development has increased interest in analysing self-
managing agile teams and how to effectively make team 
productive [16]. Boehm [17] reported in his productivity 
estimation model, Constructive Cost Model (COCOMO), 
that productivity of a software development project is 
mostly affected by the development team and their team 
management. Scacchi [18] also identified that poorly 
managed or organized project’s productivity was mostly 
lower than those projects which were well managed. 
Throughout the literature review, it has been observed that 
there is a lack of well-established dynamic theory about 
agile teamwork. This study seeks to fill this gap by 
developing an integrated model, which represents the inter-
related structure of productivity influence factors and how 
they impact (positively or negatively) agile teamwork’s 
productivity. In order to do so, this study applies a system 
dynamics approach, which can study complex system by 
exploring underlying relationships and connections between 
the components of a system that normally are not discovered 
by the input-output-process type of models used in 
organizational studies. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The methodological approach of this research is based 
on the system dynamics (SD), as a modelling and simulation 
methodology enables to model complex system considering 
all the influencing factors [19]. There are many modelling 
techniques developed and used so far, according to the 
modelling goal and perspective. However, system dynamics 
modelling chosen for this research because it provides a 
systematic method for description, exploration and analysis 
about the dynamic behavior of complex systems [18]. SD 
methodology has been applied by many researchers [19][20] 
[24][25] for studying and managing complex feedback 
system, where feedback is understood as a closed sequence 
of causal relationships. The concept of a feedback loop 
reveals that any actor in a system will eventually be affected 
by its own action. 
A number of diagramming tools are used in SD to 
capture the structure of systems, including causal 
scale/influence diagrams, stock and flows. Each causal link 
is assigned a polarity, either positive or negative to represent 
a causal relationship between two factors. It indicates how 
the dependent variable changes when the independent 
variable changes. The important loops are highlighted by a 
loop identifier, which shows whether the loop is a ‘+’ 
(reinforcing) or ‘-’ (balancing) feedback [18]. 
61Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
A. Identification of different factors affecting agile 
teamwork productivity 
Data collection: The model developed for this work is 
based on data collected from the software companies in 
Bangladesh. There are three important objectives of 
collecting information; to determine what factors affected 
productivity of agile team members, to determine how these 
factors impacting project productivity in the team’s 
perception and to determine the significance of the factors. 
Identification of the factors was initially carried out through 
an intensive literature review. A set of semi-structured 
interviews and face-to-face discussions were also conducted 
with twelve key project members from four software 
companies including project managers, scrum masters, 
developers, project owners, and considering also different 
experience profiles.  
Using the factors identified in this first step, a 
questionnaire [26] was developed. In an attempt to identify 
the perceived influencing factors and their impact on agile 
team members, the survey questionnaire was distributed to a 
total of seventeen software companies in Bangladesh. The 
company selection criteria for this preliminary study were: 
companies using agile methods for at least 1 year, 
developing software for both offshore and local market, and 
top listed companies in Bangladesh. 
Data were collected throughout a period of three months 
in 2017 (January-March). In order to ensure the quality of 
data, team members were all self-selected by their 
organization based on their work roles as members of 
existing agile teams. Therefore, participants responded to 
survey questionnaires were already aware of agile team 
environment and mostly experienced. The filled-in 
questionnaires were then analysed to identify factors, which 
have major influences on agile teamwork productivity. 
Currently, more software companies are being requested to 
participate in this survey, as the plan is to collect more than 
100 responses from different agile teams. 
B. Selection of factors for inclusion in the model 
Data analysis: Factors affecting agile teamwork 
productivity are rarely independent of the others, but a set of 
factors interacting with each other to build the final result 
[7]. The important factors identified in literature and 
interviews were taken as a starting point for the system 
approach in this research. In total, 38 factors were chosen 
for analysis even though not all of them are presented in this 
paper. In order to create a system model to analyse the 
teamwork productivity, it is required to determine the 
importance of the individual factors, their correlation with 
one another and their effects on productivity itself. The agile 
team members were asked to fill in the questionnaire to 
indicate the strength (high, medium or low) of the factors 
that they perceived influenced their productivity [25]. 
The procedure followed to extract the agile team 
member’s perception of the influence factors affecting their 
productivity can be summarized in the following steps: 
1. Convert the qualitative scale to a quantitative one. 
The qualitative scale of high, medium or low was converted 
to a number scale of 3, 2, and 1, respectively. 
TABLE I.  ARITHMETIC MEAN OF QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS FROM 
FREQUENCY ANALYSIS 
 
SL 
 
Factor 
Me-
an 
 
SL 
 
Factor 
Me-
an 
1 Culture 2.23 20 What is the 
staff turnover 
rate in the 
project 
1.82 
2 Staffing 2.76 21 Reuse  2.17 
3 Size of team  2.29 22 What is the 
software 
reuse level in 
the project 
2.00 
4 Project 
complexity 
2.23 23 Goals 2.29 
5 Team 
Leadership  
2.52  
24 
Intra group 
wage 
inequality  
1.94 
6 Mutual 
performance 
monitoring  
2.41 25 Team 
measurement 
2.17 
7 Backup 
Behaviour  
2.41 26 Self-
management  
2.17 
8 Team 
orientation  
2.52 27 Task variety 
and 
Innovation  
2.41 
9 Adaptability 2.35 28 External 
Dependencies  
2.17 
10 Feedback 2.70 29 Tools usage 2.29 
11 Mutual trust  2.76 30 Programming 
language 
2.05 
12 Coordination 2.70 31 Schedule 
pressure 
2.29 
13 Communication 2.82 32 Impact of Pair 
programming 
on 
productivity 
2.11 
14 Staff are 
appreciated for 
working long 
hours 
1.76 33 Resource 
constraints  
2.41 
15 Staff are 
rewarded (then 
or later) for 
working long 
hours 
2.11 34 Project 
Management  
2.58 
16 Adequate 
technical 
training for 
team 
2.41 35 Motivation 2.58 
17 Adequate team 
skills training 
for team  
2.35 36 External 
project factors  
2.41 
18 Team member 
turnover 
1.64 37 Dealing with 
cultural 
differences 
among 
offshore 
organizations 
2.17 
19 Key personnel 
stayed 
throughout the 
project 
2.23 38 Working 
environment  
2.35 
2. Find the total score of each factor for frequency 
analysis. Then, the arithmetic mean of the total counts was 
calculated to eliminate the factors below the average (Table. 
1) mean. 
62Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
IV. SURVEY RESULTS 
Characteristics of the sample software companies can be 
found in Table II. Fig. 1 presents the agile practices adopted 
by the participating software companies and it shows daily 
stand up meeting mostly used by all of them. Fig. 2 shows 
that lack of management support (e.g., resource constraint, 
team design choice and motivation) is the main reason for 
failure in agile projects.    
In most of the interviews, the team members could not 
define productivity as their performance measurement. Most 
of them mentioned that team management has their own 
ways of measuring productivity. Although at the end of the 
project, the management assessed their productivity on the 
basis of timeliness and quantity. At the same time, ten 
interviewees and survey respondents (Fig. 3) also mentioned 
customer satisfaction as a criterion for measuring or 
perceiving productivity. Customer satisfaction is very 
important to software development companies in 
Bangladesh as a rising market for outsourced software 
destination. According the product owner interview, dealing 
with cultural differences among offshore organisation 
influences teamwork productivity. Two main reasons behind 
this are time and culture differences.  
TABLE II.  CHARACTERISTICS OF PARTICIPATING SOFTWARE COMPANIES 
Characteristic Category Number % 
Main team 
assignment 
Development 
project 
10 58.82 
 Maintenance 
project 
7 41.17 
Team role Project manager 4 23.52 
 Developer 6 35.29 
 Software 
engineer 
3 17.65 
 Team lead 2 11.77 
 Quality 
assurance 
engineer 
2 11.77 
Experience in 
agile practice 
1-2 years 8 47.8 
 2-5 years 7 41.2 
 More than 5 
years 
2 11.8 
Development 
method 
Scrum 17 100 
Size of the 
company 
(person) 
30-50 
50-100 
100-150 
150-200 
200-250 
250-300 
More than 300 
2 
1 
5 
6 
1 
1 
1 
12 
6 
29 
35 
6 
6 
6 
 
 
Figure 1.       Agile practices adopted in software companies 
 
Figure 2.  Main reasons for failure in agile projects 
 
Figure 3.  Criterion for measuring or perceiving productivity 
 
Figure 4.  Agile team perceived productivity influence factors
63Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Sometimes it becomes difficult to keep contact with the 
offshore client on urgent issues due to time difference 
between places. Moreover, offshore client’s expectations are 
different, both in terms of their general culture and their 
views on life and work. Project developed within western 
cultures are different from eastern cultures. For example, 
daily traffic condition consumes most of the working time 
in Bangladesh, which makes the developers less motivated. 
Since, staff are not rewarded enough for working long 
hours. However, schedule pressure can be easily dealt with 
overtime working because it costs less in Bangladesh. 
Five interviewees (project leads and managers) also 
mentioned that culture is a big barrier for working in an 
agile team. This factor affects communication between team 
members. In addition, sometimes language barrier hinders 
communication. Transitioning from individual work to self-
management team requires a reorientation not only by 
developers but also by management. This changeover takes 
time and resources. For this reason, these project managers 
prefer freshers as a team member. Their software companies 
like to groom up with training than changing mind set up of 
the team members. Besides that, self-management and 
adaptability are considered key for agile development. But 
these two factors have less influence (Table. 1) on agile 
teamwork productivity and mostly depends on competent 
project management. 
Fig. 4 provides highlights of the most influencing 
productivity factors that are perceived by the agile team 
members. This study results show that agile teamwork is 
highly dependent on team effectiveness. Project manager is 
usually a technical lead and many management decisions 
are made by the top management since the majority of the 
projects are outsourced projects. Their offshore clients’ 
satisfaction (external factors dependency) is very important 
to them.  Team leadership and team orientation are very 
important for teamwork motivation. The factors impacting 
on agile teamwork productivity mentioned by the team 
members suggested that feedback, team orientation, 
communication, coordination and mutual trust improve team 
effectiveness. Eventually, this will enable team to learn how 
to effectively manage relation within team in order to 
become more productive. 
V.  QUALITATIVE MODELLING OF AGILE SOFTWARE   
         DEVELOPMENT TEAMWORK PRODUCTIVITY  
Each factor that affects agile teamwork productivity is 
itself affected by other factors [9]. Some factors may be the 
result of the same cause [19].  Fig. 5 presents the overall 
conceptual model of agile teamwork productivity. It shows 
all the influence factor’s affect found in this study. It can be 
seen in Fig. 5 that the arrows between every two variables 
differ in sign (positive or negative) to express direct or 
indirect cause-effect relationships between the two variables 
they connect.   
Distinct from previous studies [7][24] this model 
represents the team dynamics which is a collection of “soft 
factors” [23] and effects related to agile methods that 
influence the teamwork’s productivity. The soft factors that 
can affect the software development teamwork productivity 
include motivation, team management efficiency, customer 
satisfaction, skillfulness and team effectiveness 
(communication, coordination, adaptability, feedback, 
leadership, team orientation, mutual trust, monitoring, 
backup-behavior, self-management). Teams require a 
complex mixture of factors that include organizational 
support, individual skills and also teamwork skills [10] to 
work effectively. This study also found these are the most 
influential productivity factors from the agile team’s 
perspective. Within the model (see Fig. 5), it is shown that 
team effectiveness is influenced by team management, 
motivation, team design, skillfulness, resource constraint, 
communication and coordination. Team effectiveness can be 
improved by team learning processes which include 
activities such as feedback, mutual performance monitoring 
and back-up behavior. These learning activities are likely to 
create a positive change and to influence the productivity. 
On the other hand, motivation influenced by team 
management, reward, goal, salary, working environment, 
morale and external factor (customer satisfaction).  
Fig. 5 illustrates that motivation is positively related to 
team effectiveness. A motivated team is much more likely 
to be involved with the learning oriented activities to 
develop better interpersonal relations and that eventually 
will increase  the team effectiveness. On the other hand, 
lack of team management skill negatively influences 
teamwork productivity. It mainly refers to team design 
choice and resource constraint. Another factor that 
influences skillfulness is pair programming; however, this 
factor is not encouraged in Bangladeshi software 
companies. Management does not want to engage two 
resources for single work due to increase in expenses. It is 
mostly practiced by the developers when they need 
assistance to complete a difficult work. 
Getting the right person with suitable skills and 
knowledge for an agile team is a difficult job for the 
software companies in Bangladesh. Staffing (right person 
selected) happened to be  as one of  the most important 
factors impacting teamwork productivity, as Table I and 
Fig. 4 show. Consequently, team design choice became a 
significant influencing factor for agile teamwork 
productivity (Fig. 5). It affects the amount of knowledge 
that team members must apply to improve the team 
effectiveness (Fig. 5). 
VI. LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
There are a number of limitations to this study. First, this 
study was limited to 17 respondents and 12 interviewees 
from 17 software companies only. It was challenging to get 
access to more software companies due to time constraint. 
Respondents were carefully chosen from different roles 
within the agile team in order to get different perspectives of 
productivity in the context of Bangladesh software Industry.  
Another limitation of this study is the agile team 
members’ perceptions used as a response. However, with 
survey, this study relies on what the respondents provided to 
the researcher. It is possible that the respondents’ perception
64Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Team Productivity
Motivation
+
Team
Management
Reward
Culture
Team size
Coordination
Communication
Mutual trust
Leadership
Goal
Feedback
External Factor
WorkingEnvironment
Resource
constraint
Team
Effectiveness
Adaptibility
Task Variation
Turnover
+
++ +
+
+
-
Market salary
rates
Fair wage
-
unable to adjust to
the team
-
Team design
choice
Team diversity
Team collocation
Full time
allocation
+
+
+
+
Team Morale
Change in scope
Skillfulness
Training
Learning factor
Programming
language
Tools usageExternal
dependency
-
+
Mutual performance
monitoring
Project
Complexitiy
Self management
Rework
Customer
satisfaction
Product backlog
Undisovered
rework
Work completed
-
Desired workforce
Hiring rate
Discrepancy
Training rate
Experienced
workforce
Work quality
+
Actual work force
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
Team Orientation
Back-up behavior
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
Pair programming
+
Reuse
+
Overwork
Exhaustion+
-
-
Time available
Error geneation
rate
+
+
+
-
-
+
error detection and
correction rate
+
+
+
-
+
+
Change in
Technology
Market condition
+
+
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF AGILE TEAMWORK PRODUCTIVITY
Schedule pressure
Estimated time to
complete
+
+
+
+
Organization
growth
+
New project
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
<Turnover>
-
+
Figure 5.  Overall   conceptual  model of Agile   teamwork  productivity
 
may change and be different after the end of the project. To 
minimise the impact of this effect, the survey and 
interviewees’ responses were compared for factors selection 
to include in the model. The questionnaire used for this 
study had been used successfully in other research [9][22] 
and was developed after a detailed literature review. Some 
of the questions were included in the survey after getting 
knowledge about the working conditions of software 
companies in Bangladesh from the interview sessions.  
Finally, this conceptual model certainly has its 
limitations and is not complete because it only focuses on 
the influence factors. The multiple feedback processes and 
delays are not incorporated in this model. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Teamwork productivity determines the overall project 
performance in an agile software development process. 
Therefore, researchers have gained increasing interest in 
studying agile teams’ productivity. Agile team members 
should be taught to interpret and manage productivity 
factors regularly as they are self-managed.  
The researchers concluded that productivity 
improvement programs would become effective only if all 
the variables are simultaneously controlled and monitored. 
One effective solution to improve productivity is to look 
into the factors influencing productivity and also have a 
dynamic strategical model that tells the project manager in 
advance the degree of impact that these factors will have on 
team productivity. In order to achieve that, the main factors 
65Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
that affect teamwork productivity were determined. The 
findings of this stage are the main influencing factors which 
are team effectiveness, team management, motivation and 
customer satisfaction. Lack of agile team management 
support was found to be the most mentioned reason for 
failed agile project. Most followed agile method was 
SCRUM for all the respondents. Among agile practices, 
daily stand-up meeting and continuous integration were the 
most cited practices impacting teamwork productivity. 
Customer satisfaction was found as main criterion for 
measuring or perceiving productivity by the interviewees 
and survey respondents.  
As a future work, the soft factors are to be quantified to 
incorporate in system dynamics model. The proposed 
system dynamics model will provide more strategic insights 
and understanding about the effectiveness of different 
managerial policies based on non-straight forward cause-
effect relationships hidden in the system. Furthermore, this 
qualitative CLD will be used as a basis for a stock and flow 
model development of the quantitative SD method. Further 
research need to be conducted to validate the conceptual 
model against a real-world agile software development 
project. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Trendowicz and J. Münch, “Factors Influencing Software 
Development Productivity—State?of?the?Art and Industrial 
Experiences,” Advances in computers, vol. 77, pp. 185-241, Dec. 2009. 
[2] C. D. O. Melo, D. S. Cruzes, F. Kon, and R. Conradi, “Interpretative 
case studies on agile team productivity and management,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 55, pp.412-427, 
Feb.2013. 
[3] K. Petersen, “Measuring and predicting software productivity: A 
systematic map and review,” Information and Software Technology, 
vol. 53, pp.317-343, Apr.2011. 
[4] Y. Ramírez and D. Nembhard, “Measuring knowledge worker 
productivity: A taxonomy,” Journal of Intellectual Capital, vol. 5, no. 
4, Dec. 2004, pp. 602–628. 
[5] C. D. O. Melo, D. S. Cruzes, F. Kon, and R. Conradi, “Agile  team 
perceptions of productivity factors,” In Agile Conference (AGILE), 
IEEE, 2011, pp. 57-66.  
[6] X. Kong, L. Liu, and D. Lowe, “Modeling an agile web maintenance 
process using system dynamics,” In 11th ANZSYS/Managing the 
Complex V conference, ISCE Publishing, Christchurch, NZ. Dec. 
2005. 
[7] T.K. Abdel?Hamid and S. Madnick, “Software productivity: potential, 
actual, and perceived,”. System Dynamics Review, 5(2), pp. 93-113, 
June. 1989. 
[8] J. M. Lyneis and D. N. Ford, “System dynamics applied to project 
management: a survey, assessment, and directions for future 
research,” System Dynamics Review, vol. 23, no. 2?3, pp. 157-189, 
Jun. 2007. 
[9] C.O. Melo, “Productivity of agile teams: an empirical evaluation of 
factors and monitoring processes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universidade 
de São Paulo, 2015. 
[10] T. Dingsøyr and Y. Lindsjørn, “Team performance in agile 
development teams: findings from 18 focus groups,” International 
Conference on Agile Software Development, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, June. 2013, pp. 46-60. 
[11] A. Teh, E. Baniassad, D. V. Rooy, and C. Boughton, “Social 
Psychology and Software Teams: Establishing Task-
Effective Group Norms,” IEEE Software, vol. 29, no.4, pp.53–58, Jul. 
2012. 
[12] B. Tessem and F. Maurer, “Job Satisfaction and Motivation in a 
Large Agile Team,” In International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, Springer 
Heidelberg, vol. 4536, pp. 54–61., 2007. 
[13] N. B. Moe, A. Aurum, and T. Dybå, “Challenges of shared decision 
making: A multiple case study of agile software development,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 54, pp.853–865, Aug. 
2012. 
[14] N. B. Moe and T. Dingsøyr, “Scrum and team effectiveness: Theory 
and practice,” International Conference on Agile Processes and 
Extreme Programming in Software Engineering, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, Jun. 2008, pp. 11-20. 
[15] N. B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr, and T. Dybå, “A teamwork model for 
understanding an agile team: A case study of a Scrum project,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 52, pp. 480-491, May. 
2010. 
[16] T. Dingsøyr and T. Dybå, “Team effectiveness in software 
development: Human and cooperative aspects in team effectiveness 
models and priorities for future studies,” Proceedings of the 5th 
International Workshop on Co-operative and Human Aspects of 
Software Engineering. IEEE Press, 2012, pp. 27-29. 
[17] B. Barry, “Software Engineering Economics,” New York, vol. 197, 
NY: Prentice-Hall, 1981. 
[18] W. Scacchi, “Understanding and improving Software Productivity,” 
Advances in Software engineering and Knowledge engineering, 2005. 
[19] F. Nasirzadeh and P. Nojedehi, “Dynamic modelling of labour 
productivity in construction projects,” International Journal of Project 
Management, vol. 31, no. 6, Aug. 2013, pp. 903-911. 
[20] A. Rodrigues and J. Bowers, “The role of system dynamics in project 
management,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 14, 
no. 4, Aug. 1996, pp. 213-220. 
[21] B. Barry, “Centre for Systems and Software Engineering,” Oct. 2012. 
[Online]  Available 
http://sunset.usc.edu/csse/research/COCOMOII/cocomo_main.html. 
[retrieved: August, 2017]. 
[22] J. M. Verner, M. A. Babar, N. Cerpa, T. Hall, and S. Beecham, 
“Factors that motivate software engineering teams: A four country 
empirical study,”. Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 92, June. 
2014,  pp. 115-127. 
[23] V. Lalsing, S. Kishnah, and P. Sameerchand, “People factors in agile 
software development and project management,” International 
Journal of Software Engineering & Applications, vol. 3, pp. 117, 
Jan.2012. 
[24] L. L. R. Rodrigues, N. Dharmaraj, and B. R. Shrinivasa Rao, “System 
dynamics approach for change management in new product 
development,” Management Research News, vol. 29, no. 6, Aug. 
2006, pp. 512-523. 
[25] M. J. Mawdesley and S. Al-Jibouri, “Modelling construction project 
productivity using systems dynamics approach,” International Journal 
of Productivity and Performance Management, vol. 59, no.1, Dec. 
2009, pp. 18-36. 
[26]  I. Fatema, “Agile teamwork productivity influence factors,” Jan. 
2017. [Online] Available https://goo.gl/forms/I5xGdQGqFMk9he5f2. 
[retrieved: August, 2017]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
