Energy Balanced Topology for Sensor Networks
Kazi Muheymin Sakib
School of Computer Science and
Information Technology
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3001
Email: sakib@cs.rmit.edu.au
Zahir Tari
School of Computer Science and
Information Technology
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3001
Email: zahirt@cs.rmit.edu.au
Ibrahim Khalil
School of Computer Science and
Information Technology
RMIT University
Melbourne, Victoria 3001
Email: ibrahimk@cs.rmit.edu.au
Abstract— Unattended sensor networks need to be self-
configurable, scalable, energy balanced and intuitively having
maximum possible lifetime. Clustering is one of the effective
ways to achieve these objectives. In this research work, a
novel virtual clustering technique is developed for the sensor
networks. On top of that topology other networking issues e.g.
routing, data aggregation can be implemented. The approach
comprises a gateway selection algorithm with ensured network
connectivity and coverage. The virtual clusters are formed around
the gateways in a sensor field. The algorithm selects gateways
among the deployed sensor nodes based on their residual energy.
Each node in the network assesses its connectivity towards the
gateway nodes, if the connection is vulnurable it starts a new
gateway selection procedure. The technique is demand initiated,
that is, if it is helpful towards the topology, a node becomes
a gateway. Again, if the contribution becomes insignificant, a
gateway can be turned to a normal node. Beside that, we also
redefined the node characterization and node lifecycle, which also
contributes significantly to the network lifetime. We apply our
approach to a simulation environment and the simulation results
justify our assertion.
I. INTRODUCTION
During recent years, research in wireless sensor networks
has become more and more active. At the same time, network
protocols developed for sensor networks are of great im-
portance to meet specific design goals. Design of sensor
protocols for networks is affected by several factors. Sensor
networks are often unattended so self-configurable algorithms
need to be developed. A sensor network has limited memory,
limited bandwidth, and limited computational capabilities [1].
So characterization of sensor nodes and better management
of node life-cycle is needed. Despite of its energy constraint
nature a sensor network is required to work for long time.
Therefore, techniques needed to keep the network alive for
as much time as possible. Finaly the techniques should be
scalable.
We suggest that system designers can address these chal-
lenging issues in a demand initiated node organization. Sensor
Nodes should contribute to the network backbone only it is
needed to do so. Otherwise nodes can be inactive to save
its precious energy for future usage. In a distributed dynamic
system where the energy is a constraint, techniques should be
developed where the recurrent transmission of dynamic state
information is avoided. Moreover, to extend the network life
an energy balancing mechanism should also be implemented.
In this paper we proposed an adaptive topology formation
procedure for sensor networks, where the parameters of a
particular area of interest will provoke sensor nodes to par-
ticipate in the multihop network topology. The environment
parameters can be obtained by assessing the connecting paths,
residual energy and the query requests. The aim of this
research is on developing a self-configurable energy balanced
topology for the sensor networks which will live longer. This
will be achieved by organizing sensor nodes in a virtual
cluster, similar to ASCENT [2], and by balancing energy as
well as tasks over the network, similiar to the distributed
load balancing approach [3]. In particular, we will address
following questions.
1) How do we efficiently manage the sensor nodes subject
to balance the energy and tasks?
2) How do we organize the sensor nodes subject to self-
configuring and lifetime maximizing?
Hierarchichal organization of sensor nodes is used in [4],
however it may not always be scalable or self-configurable.
Clustering, a special type of hierarchichal organization, is
particularly useful for application that require scalability. Clus-
tering is a well-known method in wireless communication. In a
cluster, nodes send their data to the cluster head and the cluster
head forwards the data to other cluster heads to get closer
to the destination node [5]. Clustering enables bandwidth
reuse, better resource utilization and power control. Thus, it
maximizes the network capacity [6].
However, conventional clusters rely on a fixed infrastruc-
ture, more precisely, on a fixed area. Conventional clustering
algorithms require all of the participating nodes to advertise
cluster-dependent information repeatedly [7]. Some existing
technique even require special types of nodes like energy-
limitless sensors [8], as cluster heads. We argue that, neither
the position of a sensor nor the area of interest for sensing can
be fixed. Sensors are more promiscuous in nature; moreover
new nodes can be added or discarded randomly. The topology
should adapt to these important things. These issues cannot be
handled with fixed architecture like conventional clustering. A
dynamic clustering topology, which is adaptive and has self-
organizing capabilities, is needed.
The main contribution of this paper is to develop a virtual
clustering technique instead of its conventional counterpart
which is described in Section III. Instead of fixed architecture,
here we developed a dynamic, mutually overlapped clustering
machanism. Members of a cluster are attached to the gateway
instead of a cluster head, and the connection is not rigid.
Any node can be attached to multiple gateways. Thus any
node can be member of multiple clusters. We argue that the
responsibilities of each sensor node might be changed over
time. Based on current demand, nodes should be selected for
specific task. To identify the tasks, we first define the node
lifecycle. Based on the residual energy we classify the nodes
into two types, SEN, nodes having sufficient energy to carry
others information as well as sense own task and NEN, nodes
having only necessary energy to sense its own task. This kind
of classification helps us to make the network energy balanced.
Finally at Section VI we show our simulation methods and
results, which leads to draw the conclusion in Section V.
Related works that either influenced or closely related to our
work are described in the following section.
II. RELATED WORK
In spite of being a relatively new field of study, researchers
have begun discussing not only the uses and the challenges
facing sensor networks [9], but also been developing prelim-
inary ideas as to how these networks should be formed [7],
[2], [10] as well as managing energy appropriately [11]. There
have been some adaptive MAC layer protocols that influenced
us a lot. Ye et al. developed a MAC layer protocol for sensor
networks called S-MAC [12], Heinzelman et al. developed
an application specific protocol architecture: LEACH [13],
time division multiple-access (TDMA) MAC for low-energy
operation is found in [14]. These works though share similar
design principles with the technique proposed in this paper, but
they focused on low-level synchronization, while we focused
on topology formation.
Self-configuration is another branch of our study in sensor
networks. Melodia et al. [15], Mondinelli et al. [16] and
Sohrabi et al. [17] have made significant progress in self-
configuration of sensor nodes. For configuration they mostly
used the radio channel synchronization while we introduce a
start state where every new node has to go through a thorough
neighbor discovering process.
Mobile ad hoc network routing schemes, such as
AODV [18], DSR [19], power-aware routing in mobile ad
hoc networks, PAMAS [20], energy efficient routing schemes
in wireless sensor networks, GAF [21] and Directed diffiu-
sion [22] adaptively configure the routing paths. In these
protocols the optimal routes are chosen based on the energy
at each node along the route or they find the best possible
path based on their considered parameters. However, they do
not adopt the basic network topology. Chang et al. developed
a maximum lifetime routing protocol [23], where they find
the shortest cost path using the link costs that reflect the
communication energy consumption and the residual energy
levels. This work shares the same notion of adaptation of the
basic topology for efficient message delivery, but they used
the neighbor information update mechanism. While our work
creates the topology rather than routing paths considering the
residual energy of its own. Upon which any kind of optimal
routing algorithm can be implemented.
For organizing sensor networks Younis et. al. presented the
hybrid clustering approach, HEED [5], Ma et. al. proposed a
hub-spoke technique [8] for in-home sensor networks, Baek et
al. developed a hierarchical approch [4]. We also influenced
by Cheng et al [24]. They calculated the NP-Completeness
of a minimum energy topology which is strongly connected.
At the same time, in our work we argue that conventional
clustering would not be an energy efficient solution for the
sensor networks. Instead of conventional clustering Kwon et
al.: presented a passive clustering technique [7]. In passive
clustering the clusters are allowed to be overlapped. Thus the
cluster heads have some common nodes, so that, instead of
direct communication they can communicate with each other
through those common nodes. By doing this, the need for
special types of nodes for cluster heads is eliminated. However
this flexibility also leads to substantilly higher overhead. Every
time the topology changes there will be at least two types of
selection or election procedures: one election procedure for
cluster head and several others for identifying and selecting
common nodes agreed by the neighboring cluster heads. In
ASCENT [2], Cerpa et al. selects the active nodes to reinforce
the topology. Whenever they select a node as an active node it
stays awake all its’ lifetime and performs multihop routing. It
is already been mentioned that the area of interest for sensing
may changes randomly, an active node may no longer be
needed active. Even there may have more than the sufficient
number of active nodes to carry the data. If the technique is
not adaptive it will waste the precious energy, which in turn
reduces the sensor network lifetime.
Energy scarcity make the sensor networks unique compared
to the other distributed networks. To deal with this unique
nature network decisions should be made based on residual
energy. However, without characterising the sensor nodes
based on their energy levles, it is impossible to take any
energy based decision. Surprisingly, we did not find many
works classifies sensor nodes.
In their paper [10], Vivek et al. proposed two types of
node deployment. Type 0 nodes can only sense in its vicinity
and has short-range communication ability. Type 1 nodes are
the cluster heads that perform long-range transmissions, data
aggregation and routing within the clusters etc. We argue that,
if nodes are pre-characterized, perhaps from the factory, a
precise node deployment is essential. The position of Type
1 nodes need to be exact, otherwise some of the type 0
nodes will be left outside the range of a type 1 node. This
limits the network coverage. Yong et al. [8] identifies three
types of sensor nodes. They denote sensors according to their
resources as SRC - Small Resource Capacity, MRC - Medium
Resource Capacity and LRC - Large Resource Capacity. They
assumed that, LRC nodes are directly connected with the main
power supply. So these nodes are actually energy-limitless
sensors. This kind of nodes can only be found in an in-
home sensor network. Again the node characterization is fixed
Hibernation
 
  Sense
     Start  Transition
 Gateway
Fig. 1. Sensor Node Life-cycle.
and predetermined. However, in a practical sensor field, the
residual energy of sensor nodes is decreasing continuously.
III. PROPOSED TOPOLOGY FORMATION TECHNIQUE
DESCRIPTION
Our technique deploys nodes according to their abilities
and responsibilities. The technique selects gateways, normal
sensing nodes or hibernating nodes with the aim of creating a
balanced, lifetime maximized network. Based on the current
demand nodes can move from one state to another. To do so,
we first define the life-cycle of a sensor node then characterise
the nodes based on their residual energy, finally implement a
gateway selection algorithm to form the virtual clusters.
A. Sensor node life-cycle
Sensor nodes are resource constrained, specially in terms of
energy. To manage the sensor nodes efficiently, a well defined
node life cycle is needed.
By observing the activities of sensor nodes, a specific
pattern is found over their lifetime. Each node starts with
initialization and then based on the current available metrics
such as energy level, communication environments and query
requests it enters into the execution phase.
According to their activities, we divide the sensor node lives
into three categories -
• Initialization phase
• Decision making phase and
• Execution phase
The phases are shown in the Figure 1. The initialization
phase only occurs once when a sensor node starts itself. In
our diagram the Start state represents the initialization phase.
During their life span, sensor nodes have to make various
decisions, for example in which execution state it should
be. This is the decision making phase represented by the
‘Transition’ state in the diagram. Apart from initialization and
decision-making, each node is either in the non-active state or
in the active state. In the non-active state hibernating nodes do
nothing other than listening. Active states can be divided into
two types - sense and gateway. In the sense state nodes sense
its own territory based on the prescheduled request or query
from the sink (i.e the destination node). On the other hand,
in the gateway state, nodes perform data communication, data
aggregation in addition to its own sensing.
Decision
   Line
        Distributed
    Computing  Node
         Sensor
          Node
Under Loaded
Over Loaded
Necessary Energy
Sufficient Energy
Fig. 2. Distributed and Sensor Node characterization.
B. Node classification
Without characterizing the nodes on their energy levels, it is
impossible to create an energy balanced network. At any given
time, the residual energy level of each node may not be the
same. This is understandable because besides sensing, some
of the nodes have additional responsibilities, like transmitting
other node’s information and data aggregation. To make the
network live long, these additional responsibilities should be
redistributed among other nodes periodically. Periodical task
redistribution will ensure an energy-balanced environment in
the network. Distribution of responsibilities must be fair to
ensure that a node having minimum energy to sense its region
and transmit the sensed data to its nearby gateway node, should
not be considered for any additional burdens.
Here we assumed that all the nodes are architecturally equal,
that is, all other resources - processing power, memory capac-
ity are equal in all the sensor nodes. It is only the energy, which
is variable. It is actually decreasing over time. This unique
nature of sensor nodes leads us to characterize them based
on their residual energy. In traditional distributed systems,
processors are characterized by their process loads [3]. For
example, processors having loads below a certain threshold are
called under-loaded processors as shown in Figure 2. While
others with a load above the predefined threshold are called
over-loaded processor. Similar concept is adopted here. Sensor
nodes will be divided into two groups at a given time -
• Sufficient Energy Node (SEN)
• Necessary Energy Node (NEN)
The current (residual) energy level will be normalized to the
maximum battery capacity and scaled to 100 [25]. Based on
the normalized residual energy; a minimum level of energy is
drawn, which will be at least needed to sense the region and
to transmit the sensed data to nearby gateway station. Nodes
having residual energy above that level are called Sufficient
Energy Node (SEN), these nodes have sufficient energy to take
additional responsibilities. Nodes having residual energy less
than or equal to that level are called Necessary Energy Node
(NEN), these nodes only have energy to perform their own
sensing tasks. Now the nodes are characterized into two types,
we propose, a node only need to inform others when it changes
from SEN to NEN. This technique reduces communication
overhead substantially.
1) Determining node types (SEN/NEN): For simplicity we
assumed that -
• Comparing with the data transmission or data reception,
energy consumption in sensing is negligible [26].
• A node only transmits whenever a data packet is ready,
and packet generation is directly proportional to sensing.
• We assume either nodes receive requests for sensing from
sink nodes or there is a prescheduled query task for
every node. Based on the query, nodes sense and generate
data packets. The query of sensing may be random, non-
uniform, so we can assume that, each sensing node has
packet streams with Poission distribution.
Then, energy consumption or transmission cost over time t
of a non-gateway node is -
Ei(NG)(t) = Etx × ?i × t (1)
Where, Etx - is the energy cost for transmitting a single
packet. ?i - is the packet generation rate at node i.
A gateway node receives data packets from its neighbors
then transmits those to the next gateway. Since all the neigh-
bors have independent packet streams with Poission distribu-
tion, the packet stream for a gateway node is still a Poission
process. Let, gateway node j itself generates packets at a rate
?j packets and has nj neighbors. Then the packet arrival rate
at gateway j is -
?j = ?j +
nj
?
k=1
?k (2)
Where, ?k is the packet generation rate at the kth neighbor.
The Expectation value of total packets at gateway j for
duration t is -
Xj(t) = ?j0 × t +
nj
?
k=1
?k × t (3)
For simplicity, let us assume that, energy to transmit (Etx) and
receive (Erx) a single data packet is the same and is constant,
i.e.,
Etx = Erx = C (4)
Then, total energy consumption at Gateway j - total energy
spent to receive all the packets from the neighbors and transmit
Xj(t) packets -
Ei(G)(t) = Erx ×
nj
?
k=1
?k × t + EtxXj(t) (5)
? Ei(G)(t) = C(
nj
?
k=1
?k × t + Xj(t)) (6)
Now if node i, spends t1 time as a non-gateway node and
t2 time as a gateway node. Then total energy consumption
of node i over time t (where, t = t1 + t2) can be found by
equation 1 and equation 6, as -
  
  
  
 
 
 



 
 
 
Node
Sensing
Gateway
Area of a 
Virtual Cluster
Fig. 3. Virtual Clustering.
Ei(t) = Ei(NG)(t1) + Ei(G)(t2) (7)
If total amount of initial energy in a sensor node is E and
the energy decision level is Eth [Energy Threshold] then,
? =
E ?Ei(t)
E
=
?
?
?
? > Eth Type = SEN
? < Eth Type = NEN
? = 0 Type = Exhausted
(8)
C. Virtual clustering
Here we propose a novel virtual clustering technique having
energy efficient but lifetime maximizing topology. On top
of that topology other networking issues, e.g. routing, data
aggregation can be implemented. In virtual clustering, there
is no fixed (geographical) area for any clusters. Cluster areas
can overlap with each other’s. Members of any virtual cluster
can be associated with multiple gateways. Members of any
virtual cluster can even initiate to form another virtual cluster
as overlapping is allowed. That is virtual clustering is demand
initiated, adaptive and self-configuring.
We build the virtual clusters around each of the gate-
way nodes. The gateway selection algorithm, described later,
choose the appropriate gateways. To maintain the network
connectivity each gateway is formed within the range of at
least another gateway. It will also ensure that nodes within the
cluster will have redundant connections to their gateways and
have minimized packet loss probability as well. The region of
a virtual cluster is the region of the gateway node, so that
clustering is nothing but selecting the gateway nodes then
associating the neighbors with the gateway. In the following
sections gateway formation and member association procedure
will be described in detail.
1) Virtual cluster formation: Whenever a gateway node
is selected, it informs its neighboring nodes through gate-
way confirmation message. Each node receives the gateway
confirmation message, updates the gateway table. Though the
gateway node does not maintain any extra member list, the
nodes received the gateway confirmation message become
connected with that gateway. To be able to transmit sensed
data, every node needs to be connected with at least one
gateway. Thus the gateway node will form a loosely coupled
virtual cluster with the surrounding neighboring nodes, which
is shown in the Figure 3.
According to the definition of the gateway, there must have
at least one gateway node in the neighboring nodes. We
assumed that there are some nodes called initial gateways.
Initial gateways never change their states. Sink nodes are
considered as all time gateway nodes. Based on these initial
gateway nodes, gradually the topology will be formed all over
the sensor field. This assumption was necessary to form the
topology.
D. Gateway selection Algorithm
After receiving a gateway request message, a node first
checks the energy level and connection to other gateways. If
the energy level of that node is above the energy threshold
and the node is connected with at least another gateway node,
the node is considered as an eligible candidate to become
a gateway. Each eligible node then checks the number of
gateway nodes in its communication range. If the number of
gateway nodes equals the upper bound of a threshold (Gth),
it refrains itself from becoming a gateway node.
If the node is a SEN, connected to at least one other gateway
node and the number of connected gateways has not exceeded
the gateway threshold Gth, it enters into the transition state
to participate in the gateway formation procedure. The node
then sends its willingness message to its neighbors and waits
for a predefined amount of time (tp) to hear from other nodes.
If there are no other aspirant nodes from the neighbors, it
becomes a gateway node, and informs the neighbors to update
their respective gateway tables. If the node receives willingness
messages from others, that is, there is more than one eligible
node; the node will wait for a random amount of time (ts).
Within this period of time, if any confirmation of gateway
message is received from any other nodes, it exits from the
gateway procedure and reverts to its previous state. Otherwise,
after waiting ts time, it sends its confirmation of gateway
message to its neighbors and enters into the gateway state.
The gateway selection algorithm is given in the Algorithm 1.
1) Network connectivity and coverage: As gateways selec-
tions are demand initiated, there could have a chance of iso-
lated clusters. However, our algorithm carefully considers that
immense issue. We mathematically proved that the algorithm
ensures the network connctivity and network coverage in the
followings.
Assume that,
• ni is the set of neighboring nodes of gateway node i
(representing virtual cluster i as well).
• N is the super set of all the sensor nodes in the network.
•
?
(n) is the gateway selection algorithm, which selects a
gateway from the set n.
The algorithm starts from the initial gateway nodes (sink
nodes), and it selects gateways based on descent directions.
If the communication range of a sensor node is r. average
distance of the next gateway node will be r/2. That is, from the
initial gateway, the algorithm constructs a gateway sequence
according to the following recursion rule.
If the distance from the initial point (sink node) of gateway
i and gateway i+1 is hi and hi+1 respectively. Then -
Assume:
Each node has a gateway information table to
store at most Gth number of gateway info.
Let :
NType: type of node GNo: no of gateways
Gth: gateway threshold State: state of the node
Msg: Control message Table: gateway info
tp: predefined wait time ts: random wait time
When gateway request message received;1.1
if NType 6= NEN AND Gno 6= 0 AND Gno ? Gth1.2
then
Stateprev ? Statecurrent ;1.3
Statecurrent ? Statetransition ;1.4
Broadcast( Msgwillingness);1.5
Wait(tp);1.6
if Msgreceived == Msgwillingness then1.7
Wait(ts);1.8
if Msgreceived == Msgconfirmation then1.9
Update(Table);1.10
Statecurrent ? Stateprev ;1.11
end1.12
else1.13
Broadcast(Msgconfirmation);1.14
Statecurrent ? Stategateway ;1.15
end1.16
end1.17
else1.18
Broadcast(Msgconfirmation);1.19
Statecurrent ? Stategateway ;1.20
end1.21
end1.22
Algorithm 1: Gateway Selcetion Algorithm
|hi+1 ? hi| ? r (9)
? hi+1 ? hi + r (10)
According to the definition of a gateway, there must be
another gateway (GNo 6= 0) within the communication range
of that node. So that -
?
(ni) = {xi|xi ? ni AND xi ? ni?1}
?
(ni+1) = {xi+1|xi+1 ? ni+1 AND xi+1 ? ni}
Which implies that -
ni ? ni+1 6= ? (11)
Now, if equation 10 and equation 11 holds and there are no
discrete sensor nodes in the network, then -
n0 ? n1 ? n2 ? ......... ? ni = N (12)
Equation 11 ensures that a virtual cluster is connected at
least one other cluster. That ensures the connectivity among
the network. Equation 12 ensures that the algorithm covers the
entire network.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we report results from our preliminary
performance evaluation of our proposed technique. We will
describe our simulation environments, our methodology and
the comparison results with other techniques.
A. Simulation Environment
We used OMNeT++ as the simulation tool. We assumed that
the sink node is a stand alone machine connected to the main
power supply. Otherthan that, all the sensor nodes have the
same memory, same energy and same processing power. We
also assumed that the nodes have the same communication
range. Any node within the communication range of others
can communicate with them bidirectionally. We have created
our own energy model as described in the section III. The sink
node is positioned in the top right corner of the simulated area,
we then deploy the sensor nodes. Initially, we created a two
hop network by putting the nodes as far as possible, that is, at
the opposite end of the communication range. After that, we
gradually increase the node density.
Number of generated data packets are directly proportional
to the sensing query or sensing schedule. The sensing query
is also random and exponentially distributed. The generated
packets are to be routed to the sink node through the gateway
nodes. For each data communication there will be involved
three types of energy consumption - sense the data, transmit
data to the gateway, then receive and retransmit that packet
among the gateways. We assume that the energy consumed
while there is no query negligible.
B. Methodology
In the designing of the topology formation technique, we
assumed that an efficient management of energy is required for
a long lasting sensor network. If network related decisions are
taken based on the remaining energy levels of a sensor node, it
would certainly increase the lifetime of the nodes as well as the
network. Our next and most vital assumption was classifying
the sensor nodes (i.e., NEN or SEN) based on residual energy
levels with the aim of forming an energy balanced network.
Our first goal is to implement our algorithm in the simulation
environment to compare with others. This serves the important
purpose of validating our theoritical assumptions.
Our next target is to study the sensitivity of the proposed
technique to the choice of parameters, for example, decision
line of residual energy levels, number of gateway threshold,
gateway formation waiting time etc. The metrics that have
been chosen to analyze the performance are : Network Life-
time - which is measured by two ways. The time taken before
the first node of the network dies. A similar metric has been
used in [23]. The other one is the time taken to exhaust 50 %
of the nodes, similar to the metric used in [2]. To show energy
balancing we used here the standard deviation of residual
energies. Standard deviation is calculated when the residual
energy of at least one of the nodes reaches to zero.
Each experiment generates sense data with exponential
distribution. The data is carried out to the sink using shortest
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
N
et
w
or
k 
L
if
et
im
e
Node Density
Lifetime vs. Node Density
All-Active
ASCENT
PROPOSED
Fig. 4. Density vs. Lifetime : time taken to die the first node.
path algorithm. The transmission layer implements the simple
CSMA MAC, which is provided by the OMNeT++. We used
fixed parametric value for the Gateway threshold (? 3), Deci-
sion line of Energy levels (=20 percent), Gateway formation
waiting times (=0.002 seconds) for all the cases. We will
justify these values later. For simplicity, the sensor nodes are
considered immobile. We will experiment our work with the
mobility framework later.
C. Comparative Study
Our first experiment compare the average lifetime of the
sensor network where our proposed technique is applied, with
the all-active case [the all-active case denotes the simple
deployment of sensor nodes, where no topology formation
algorithm was applied.], and ASCENT [2].
Figure 4 shows the time taken for the first node to die as a
function of the node density. At a lower density our proposed
technique performs similar to the ASCENT. This is because,
when the density is too low, there will be excess gateway nodes
to carry the data. The number of gateways is restricted by the
parameter, gateway threshold. However, when we increased
the node density, there were less gateway nodes comparing
to the non-gateway nodes, so that, the task distribution was
more even and there were more nodes to carry the duty of
a out going gateway. In the proposed technique if any node
crosses the Decision line of the energy levels, it is considered
as NEN and they are forced to leave the gateway state. NEN
nodes are alive and only can perform their own sensing. This
kind of essenstial classifications were absent in other methods,
which badly effects their network lifetime. The result clearly
shows that the proposed technique outperforms the other two
under moderate to highly densed condition.
Figure 5 shows the time taken to die at least 50 percent of
the nodes while we varied the node density in our test bed.
Though the gaps between the other techniques are reduced,
however, we argue that, the network might be partitioned well
before the time it takes to exhaust the 50% nodes. Still the
figure shows the suprimacy of our proposed technique.
In figure 6 we plot the standard deviation of remaining
energy levels while the energy level of the first node reaches to
zero. This metric shows us how balanced the network is. For
an ideal condition, where the tasks are exactly distributed, the
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
N
et
w
or
k 
L
if
et
im
e 
(N
or
m
al
iz
ed
)
Node Density
Network Lifetime (50% exhausted node) vs Node Density
All-Active
ASCENT
PROPOSED
Fig. 5. Density vs. Lifetime : time taken to die 50 percent of the nodes.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
St
an
da
rd
 D
ev
ia
tio
n
Node Density
Standard Deviation of Residual Energy levels vs Node Density
All-Active
ASCENT
PROPOSED
Fig. 6. Density vs. Standard Deviation of remaining energies : when first
node dies.
stadard deviation of remaining energy levels should be zero.
Here the figure shows that the deviation is about 50 percent
in our technique, while the others are around 90 percent.
To explain how our proposed technique reacts to differ-
ent configuration parameters, we conducted sensitivity ex-
periments on two parameters gateway threshold and energy
threshold. Figure 7 and 8 show the standard deviation of
remaining enerigies and network lifetime respectively, when
we varied the gateway threshold from less than or equal to
2 to less than or equal to 5. Figure 7 shows that the lower
the gateway threshold the larger the deviation, but after a
certain threshold value the deviation almost stabilizes. That is,
 30
 35
 40
 45
 50
 55
 60
 65
 70
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
St
an
da
rd
 D
ev
ia
tio
n
Node Density
Standard Deviation of Residual Energy levels vs Node Density while the Gateway threshold varied
<=2
<=3
<=4
<=5
Fig. 7. Density vs. Standard Deviation of remaining energies : while the
Gateway threshold varied .
 90
 100
 110
 120
 130
 140
 150
 160
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
L
if
et
im
e
Node Density
Lifetime vs Node Density while varying the Gateway threshold
<=2
<=3
<=4
<=5
Fig. 8. Density vs. Network Lifetime : while the Gateway threshold varied.
 40
 45
 50
 55
 60
 65
 70
 0  20  40  60  80  100  120
St
an
da
rd
 D
ev
ia
tio
n
Node Density
Standard Deviation of Residual Energy levels vs Node Density while the energy threshold varied
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Fig. 9. Density vs. Standard Deviation of remaining energies : while the
Energy threshold varied.
for every network there is a saturation point for the gateway
threshold. After that saturation point, increasing of gateway
number doesn’t create any effect to the standard deviation of
the remaining energies. Similar scenario has also been noticed
in Figure 8. The threshold value is proportional to lifetime upto
a cetain point. After that it again stabilizes. Most importantly
the saturation point of this two important network properties
are almost same. In Figure 7, the best result is found when the
threshold is less than or equal to 3, and in Figure 8, at threshold
? 3, we got closest to the best result. Gateway threshold is
directly related to the maximum connectivity of a single node
in the network. In our simulation, a single sensor node can
have maximum five neighbors.
Energy threshold is used to decide whether the sensor node
will be NEN or SEN, this type of characterization helps us to
create a balaced network in terms of energy as well as tasks.
Figure 9 shows the standard deviation of residual energies as a
function of node density while we varied the energy threshold
from 0% to 50% . We concluded that, at energy threshold 20
percent we got the least deviation for our simulated network.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Each of the gateway nodes forms an overlapping clusters
as shown in Figure 3. We call this type of clusters as virtual
clusters as the members and area of any particular clusters are
not mutually exclusive. The topology is also stateless as it is
changing continuously and does not depend on the previous
states. It only depends on current network demand. Each of
these virtual clusters also contains at least another gateway.
That means, within the one-hop distance of a gateway there
is another gateway. So, most of the intermediate nodes may
be connected with more than one gateway. This will ensure
possibly redundant transmission paths.
Virtual clusters are dynamic and adaptive. Whenever a
node faces a high packet loss, or a node moves out of
communication range of its gateway, it can initiate the gateway
formation procedure. As a result, a new virtual cluster can be
formed. As the gateway procedure is demand-initiated, usually
more gateways can be found in the high sensing active regions
than the less active regions. This is an inherent procedure of
reinforcement in the gateway formation procedure. This is a
self-organizing topology. Each node in the network must go
through the start state, where it will initialize itself by discov-
ering its neighbors. After starting whenever a node enters the
transition state it updates its neighboring information.
By characterizing sensor nodes as two types NEN or SEN
(Figure 2), we able to reduce the overhead transmission
convincingly. Now nodes only need to inform this state once
in a lifetime when it reduces from SEN to NEN, if it is
needed. Clear understanding of node lifecycle (Figure 1) helps
to distribute the tasks evenly. Which is important to make the
network balance.
This research does not consider the network partition.
Network partition can happen due to dieing of sensor nodes.
Sensor nodes can be died early because of over activity
or because of some external events like stomping, natural
calamities. Detecting network partitions and handling network
partition can be our future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Australian Research Council
(ARC), linkage scheme, no. LP0347217.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Heo and P. K. Varshney, “Energy-efficient deployment of intelligent
mobile sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 78–92,
Jan. 2005.
[2] A. Cerpa and D. Estrin, “Ascent: Adaptive self-configuring sensor
networks topologies,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 272–285, July 2004.
[3] P. K. Sinha, Distributed Operating Systems, Concepts and Design. IEEE
Press, 1997.
[4] S. J. Baek, G. D. Veciana, and X. Su, “Minimizing energy consumption
in large-scale sensor networks through distributed data compression
and hierarchical aggregation,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communication, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1130–1140, Aug. 2004.
[5] O. Younis and S. Fahmy, “Heed: a hybrid, energy-efficient, distributed
clustering approach for ad hoc sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 366–379, Oct. 2004.
[6] W. Heinzelman, J. Kulik, and H. Balakrishnan, “Adaptive protocols
for information dissemination in wireless sensor networks,” in 5th
ACM/IEEE Mobicom Conference (MobiCom ’99), Seattle, WA, USA,
Aug. 1999.
[7] K. J. Taek, M. Gerla, V. Varma, M. Barton, and T. Hsing, “Efficient
flooding with passive clustering-an overhead-free selective forward
mechanism for ad hoc/sensor networks,” IEEE, vol. 91, no. 8, pp. 1210–
1220, Aug. 2003.
[8] Y. Ma and J. H. Aylor, “System lifetime optimization for heterogeneous
sensor networks with a hub-spoke topology,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 286–294, July 2004.
[9] D. Ganesan, A. Cerpa, W. Ye, Y. Yu, J. Zhao, and D. Estrin, “Networking
issues in wireless sensor network,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing (JPDC), Special issue on Frontiers in Distributed Sensor
Networks, 2004.
[10] V. Mhatre, C. Rosenberg, D. Kofman, R. Mazumdar, and N. Shroff, “A
minimum cost heterogeneous sensor network with a lifetime constraint,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 4–15, Jan.
2005.
[11] C. Schurgers, V. Tsiatsis, S. Ganeriwal, and M. Srivastava, “Optimizing
sensor networks in the energy-latency-density design space,” IEEE
transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 70–80, Jan. 2002.
[12] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “Medium access control with
coordinated adaptive sleeping for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Networking, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 493–506, June 2004.
[13] W. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An appli-
cation specific protocol architecture for wireless microsensor networks,”
IEEE transactions on wireless communications, vol. 1, no. 10, pp. 660–
670, Oct. 2002.
[14] L. Clare, G. Pottie, and J. Agre, “Self-organizing distributed nensor
networks,” in SPIE conference: Unattended Ground Sensor Technologies
and Applications, Orlando, Fl, USA, Apr. 1999, pp. 229–237.
[15] T. Melodia, D. Pompili, and I. Akyldiz, “On the interdependence of
distributed topology control and geographical routing in ad hoc and
sensor networks,” IEEE Journal on Selceted Areas in Communications,
vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 520–532, Mar. 2005.
[16] F. Mondinelli and Z. Kovacs-Vajna, “Self-localizing sensor network
architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 277–283, Apr. 2004.
[17] K. Sohrabi, W. Merrill, J. Elson, L. Girod, F. Newberg, and W. Kaiser,
“Methods for scalable self-assembly of ad hoc wireless sensor net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
317–331, Oct. 2004.
[18] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Belding-Royer, and S. R. Das. (2003, Feb.) Ad hoc
on-demand distance vector (aodv) routing. draft-ietf-manet-aodv-13.txt.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-manet-
aodv-13.txt
[19] J. Broch, D. Johnson, and D. Maltz. (1999, Oct.) The dynamic source
routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks. draft-ietf-manet-dsr-03.txt.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-manet-
dsr-03.txt
[20] S. Singh, M. Woo, and C. S. Raghabendra, “Power-aware routing in mo-
bile ad hoc networks,” in ACM/IEEE Mobicom Conference (MobiCom
’1998), Dallas, Texas, USA, 1998, pp. 181–190.
[21] Q. Gao, K. J. Blow, D. J. Holding, I. W. Marshall, and X. Peng,
“Routing analysis and energy efficiency in wireless sensor networks,”
in IEEE 6th CAS Symp. on emerging technologies: Mobile and Wireless
Communication, Shanghai, Chaina, May 2004, pp. 533–536.
[22] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, “Directed diffusion: A
scalable and robust communication paradigm for sensor networks,” in
4th ACM/IEEE Mobicom Conference (MobiCom ’2000), Boston, MA,
USA, Aug. 2000, pp. 56–67.
[23] J. Chang and L. Tassiulas, “Maximum lifetime routing in wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE/ACM Transsactions on Networking, vol. 12, no. 4, pp.
609–619, Aug. 2004.
[24] X. Cheng, B. Narahari, R. Simha, M. Cheng, and D. Liu, “Strong min-
imum energy topology in wireless sensor networks: Np-completeness
and heuristics,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 248–256, July 2003.
[25] X. Hong, M. Gerla, and H. Wang, “Load-balanced, energy-aware com-
munications for mars sensor-networks,” in IEEE Aerospace Conference,
Bigsky, MI, USA, Mar. 2002, pp. 3–1109 – 3–1115.
[26] R. Min, M. Bhardwai, N. Ickes, A. Wang, and A. Chandrakasan, “The
hardware and the network: Total-system strategies for power aware wire-
less microsensors,” in IEEE CAS Workshop on Wireless Communications
and Networking Power Efficient Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, Pasadena,
California, USA, Sept. 2002.
