ar
X
iv
:1
01
0.
01
86
v1
  [
cs
.C
R
] 
 1
 O
ct
 2
01
0
Review on the Advancements of DNA
Cryptography
Beenish Anam
School of Computing
The Bradford University
West Yorkshire, UK
b.anam@brad.ac.uk
Kazi Sakib
School of Computing
The Bradford University
West Yorkshire, UK
k.muheymin-us-sakib@bradford.ac.uk
Md. Alamgir Hossain
School of Computing
The Bradford University
West Yorkshire, UK
M.A.Hossain1@Bradford.ac.uk
Keshav Dahal
School of Computing
The Bradford University
West Yorkshire, UK
k.p.dahal@Bradford.ac.uk
Abstract—Since security is one of the most important issues,
the evolvement of cryptography and cryptographic analysis
are considered as the fields of on-going research. The latest
development on this field is DNA cryptography. It has emerged
after the disclosure of computational ability of Deoxyribo Nucleic
Acid (DNA). DNA cryptography uses DNA as the computational
tool along with several molecular techniques to manipulate it.
Due to very high storage capacity of DNA, this field is becoming
very promising. Currently it is in the development phase and
it requires a lot of work and research to reach a mature stage.
By reviewing all the potential and cutting edge technology of
current research, this paper shows the directions that need to be
addressed further in the field of DNA cryptography.
I. INTRODUCTION
DNA cryptography, a new branch of cryptography utilizes
DNA as an informational and computational carrier with
the aid of molecular techniques. It is relatively a new field
which emerged after the disclosure of computational ability of
DNA [1]. DNA cryptography gains attention due to the vast
storage capacity of DNA, which is the basic computational
tool of this field. One gram of DNA is known to store about
108 tera-bytes. This surpasses the storage capacity of any
electrical, optical or magnetic storage medium [2], [3].
DNA is being proposed to use for many computational
purposes. For example, Barish et. al. demonstrated a tile
system that takes input and produces output using DNA [4].
The method is now also used to solve many NP-complete
and other problems. Such as Rothemund et. al. showed that
DNA can also be used to compute XOR function which is
an essential part of cryptosystems [5]. It is a very potential
field of research, as work which has been done in this field
suggests that it can put many challenges to the modern
cryptosystems [6]. By utilizing DNA cryptography, several
methods have been designed to break many modern algorithms
like Data Encryption Standard (DES) [7], RSA [8], [9] and
Number Theory Research Unit (NTRU) [10], [11].
The research of DNA cryptosystem is still in its early
stage. Thus, the scope of doing research on this new field
is multi-dimensional. Work needs to be done from theory
to realization, as both of the dimensions yet to be matured.
Recent development showed that some key technologies in
DNA research, such as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR),
DNA synthesis, and DNA digital coding, have only been
developed [12].
Traditional cryptographic systems have long legacy and
are built on a strong mathematical and theoretical basis.
Traditional security systems like RSA, DES or NTRU are
also found in real time operations. So, an important perception
needs to be developed that the DNA cryptography is not to
negate the tradition, but to create a bridge between existing and
new technology. The power of DNA computing will strengthen
the existing security system by opening up a new possibility
of a hybrid cryptographic system.
This paper gives a simple comparison between traditional
and DNA cryptographic methods. It gives an insight to the
benefits which can be achieved with the help of DNA cryptog-
raphy and discusses the techniques which are currently used in
this field. It also stresses on the need that both the traditional
and DNA cryptographic techniques should be merged in a
way that resulting cryptographic systems can enjoy the benefits
from both the fields. It also points out some loop holes in this
field and discusses that this field needs further research to gain
the stage of realization.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
gives background knowledge which is required to understand
DNA cryptography and an insight is given to the field of
cryptography, DNA and DNA cryptography. In this section, a
typical cryptographic scenario is also explained, which is used
in later sections. Section III discusses the techniques which
are used in DNA cryptography. What has been done and what
still needs to be done will be discussed in Section IV. Finally,
conclusion is drawn in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Modern cryptography uses cross disciplinary interactions
between mathematics, computer science, and engineering. Ap-
plications of cryptography include online banking, computer
authetication, and e-commerce. The discussion starts with the
most basic approach for cryptography, and then improvements
are demonstrated.
A. Cryptography
Cryptography is a very significant and widely used field,
because it is the basis of security of all information. It is a
very old field, but in modern times due to the increased use
of internet, the significance of this field has been multiplied.
The whole manual systems most importantly banking, defence
and shopping systems are now being converted into web
applications. The precious data which is being transferred over
the internet is vulnerable to many security attacks [13] such
as IP spoofing, man in the middle attack, teardrop etc. To
secure our systems and applications, we rely on the strength
of cryptography.
Cryptanalysis runs parallel to the cryptography. The aim of
the cryptanalysis is to analyse and try to break the security
systems proposed by the discipline of cryptography [14]. So
that means, how strong a cryptographic system is, depends
on how weak cryptanalysis is possible for that system [15].
A great deal of work has been done on the cryptography
and cryptanalysis. And as a result, various systems have been
designed (for example, RSA, ECC, etc.) to achieve high level
of security.
B. Cryptographic Scenario
The typical scenario in cryptography is that Alice (sender)
wants to send some messages secretly to Bob (intended
receiver). The message which is to be sent is in the ordinary
language understood by all, is called a plaintext. The process
of converting plaintext into a form which cannot be understood
without having special information is called encryption. This
unreadable form is called cipher text and the special knowl-
edge is called encryption key.
The conversion of cipher text again into plaintext with
a special knowledge is called decryption, whereas special
knowledge for decryption is called decryption key. Only the
receiver has this special knowledge and only receiver can
decrypt a cipher text with this knowledge called decryption
key. In traditional cryptography encryption and decryption is
done by algorithms for which currently there is no available
solution [6].
C. Types of Cryptography
There are three prominent branches or sub fields of cryp-
tography [6], named as:
1) Modern Cryptography
2) Quantum Cryptography
3) DNA Cryptography.
These three fields depend upon different difficult problems
concerning to different disciplines for which there is no known
solution until now. The modern cryptography is based upon the
difficult mathematical problems such as prime factorization,
elliptic curve problem, for which there is no known solution
found so far. Quantum cryptography which is also relatively
a new field, is based upon the Heisenberg uncertainty prin-
ciple of Physics, and DNA cryptography depends upon the
difficult biological processes concerning to the field of DNA
technology [6] such as :
• Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) for a sequence without
knowing the correct two primer pairs [6], [12]
Fig. 1. Structure of DNA (A - Adenine, G - Guanine, C - Cytosine and T
- Thiamine).
• and another is extracting information from the DNA
chip without having the knowledge about the sequences
present in different spots of DNA chip [16].
A detailed explanation of these technqiues is given in
Section 3.
D. DNA
Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) is the hereditary material
of almost entire living organisms ranging from very small
viruses to complex human beings [17]. It is an information
carrier of all life forms. DNA is a double helical structure
with two strands running anti parallel as shown in Figure 1.
DNA is a long polymer of small units called nucleotides. Each
nucleotide consists of three components:
1) a Nitrogenous base
2) a five carbon sugar
3) a Phosphate group
There are four different nucleotides depending upon the type
of nitrogenous base they have got. There are four different
bases A, C, T, G called Adenine, Cytosine, Thiamine and
Guanine respectively [18], [19].
DNA stores all the huge and complex information about an
organism with the combination of only these four letters A,
C, T and G. These bases form the structure of DNA strands
by forming hydrogen bonds with each other to keep the two
strands intact. A forms hydrogen bond with T whereas C and G
forms bonds with one another [20]. It can be seen in Figure 1.
Until 1994, DNA was believed to carry only the bio-
logical information but it was Adleman who revealed the
computational ability of DNA when he solved NP complete
Hamiltonian path problem of seven vertices [1]. After that
DNA has been used as a computational tool as well [21].
DNA computers deal with the DNA language that consists
of four letters A, C, T and G [17], [18]. The computational
ability of DNA is now used in cryptography as well. DNA
cryptography is a very potential field and if manipulated in
appropriate manner can give much harder competition to other
fields of cryptography [22].
E. DNA Cryptography
Cryptography is the science that addresses all the aspects
for secure communication over an insecure channel, namely
TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN TRADITIONAL AND DNA CRYPTOGRAPHIC METHODS
Security Time Complexity Storage Medium Storage Capacity Stability
Traditional Cryptography One Fold ? few seconds Computer (Silicon) Chips 1 gram of silicon chip Dependant on
carries 16 MB [23] implementation environments
DNA Cryptography Two Fold ? few hours DNA strands 1 gram of DNA Dependant on
carries 108 TB [22] environmental conditions
privacy, confidentiality, key exchange, authentication, and non-
repudiation. As mentioned above, DNA provides an excellent
mean to secure data, the technique has been named as DNA
cryptography. In such techniques, plaintext message data is
encoded in DNA strands by the use of an alphabet of oligonu-
cleotide sequences. Natural DNA obtained from biological
sources may be recoded using nonstandard bases, to allow
for subsequent processing [1], [17]. Input and output of the
DNA data can be moved to conventional binary storage media
by DNA chip arrays. Where binary data may be encoded in
DNA strands by use of an alphabet of short oligonucleotide
sequences.
In Table I, a simple comparison is shown between traditional
and DNA cryptographic techniques by considering attributes
including security provided by the technique, time taken to
process the technique, storage medium which is used to store
the data in the technique, the storage capacity of the storage
medium used and the stability of the results for the particular
technique.
By considering security provided by both the techniques,
it can be seen that DNA cryptographic techniques provide
two fold security by involving computational difficulties as
well as the biological difficulties. In Traditional Cryptography
security can be said to be one fold as it relies on only
computational difficulties. Time taken by the efficient cryp-
tographic algorithms is few seconds, whereas DNA crypto-
graphic techniques that involve PCR and DNA chip technology
can take hours to complete the whole process. Traditional
cryptography generally runs on computers over the network,
so the storage mediums are silicon chips of the computers,
whereas DNA cryptography deals with the DNA strands which
are manipulated by biological techniques. If we consider DNA
as the storage medium, it has got huge storage capacity
as compared to the equivalent amount of the silicon chips.
This property of data makes DNA cryptography and DNA
computing very tempting and beneficial field of research.
Stability of results of cryptographic techniques refers that
encryption and decryption always gives the same results. If the
stability of the results of encryption and decryption provided
is analysed, it can be seen that traditional cryptographic
algorithms depends on the implementation conditions [24].
Implementation conditions include the platform and the lan-
guage limitations used to encode the algorithm. Whereas the
stability of DNA cryptography is very much dependant on
the environmental conditions such as temperature, pH. This
instability of DNA cryptography is discussed later.
III. DIFFICULT BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS USED IN DNA
CRYPTOGRAPHY
DNA cryptography utilizes biological methods for encryp-
tion and decryption. Among those, Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) [6], [12] and DNA chip technology [16] are the most
prominent cryptographic techniques. However, steganography
using DNA, is also found in the literature. All these techniques
are described below.
A. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
PCR is an amplification and quantification process of DNA.
The purpose of designing PCR is to increase the amount of
DNA, as it is very difficult to deal with small amount of DNA
strands. The name Polymerase chain reaction comes from the
enzyme (biological catalyst) known as polymerase used in the
technique and chain represents that this amplification process
occurs in many cycles one after another. By performing PCR,
short sequences of DNA can be analysed even in samples con-
taining only minute quantities of DNA. PCR can select small
strands of DNA and amplifies those. In practice, amplification
of DNA involves cloning of segments of interest into vectors
for expression. PCR is highly efficient so that untold numbers
of copies can be made from small selected DNA. Moreover,
PCR uses the same molecules that nature uses for copying
DNA. To perform PCR, one should know the sequence of
DNA to be amplified to design the right primer for it, where
primer is a sequence containing few numbers of nucleotides
complimentary to the specific sequence of DNA which is to
be amplified [6]. In short, we can identify the PCR process
into two phases:
• Two ”primers”, short single-stranded DNA sequences to
correspond to the beginning and ending of the DNA
stretch.
• Polymerase enzyme that moves along the segment of
DNA, reading its code and assembling the copy.
The encryption key, in this case, is compound, consisting
of both PCR primers pair and public key. Similarly decryption
key consists of complementary primer pairs and private key.
Fig. 2. Summary of Cryptographic Technique using PCR
Encryption starts with the exchange of two primers (forward
and reverse) between Alice and Bob via a secure channel [6].
For Encryption, pre-processing can be done, that the whole
algorithm like RSA can be applied first. This step is numbered
as 1 in Figure 2. Then cipher text can be converted into
DNA sequence by coding scheme represented by number 2
in Figure 2. By performing this, entirely different cipher text
can be obtained [6]. In literature, cipher DNA refers the term
cipher text which is in the form of DNA sequence, and plain
text DNA denotes the plain text which is in the form of DNA.
The prepared cipher DNA is then flanked by the secret
primers and mixed with a number of other unknown DNA.
Alice sends this DNA mixture to Bob [6]. For decryption,
Bob can retrieve the cipher DNA by performing PCR using
its secret primer, and reverse the whole process which is done
for encryption [6]. Anyone without knowing the two primers
cannot retrieve target cipher DNA [12]. Decryption steps are
represented as 3 and 4 in Figure 2. In the same figure, number
3 denotes that the cipher DNA can be retrieved by using DNA
decryption key (secret primers) and is converted into cipher
text by using coding scheme. Finally, in the figure, 4 denotes
that the cipher text is decrypted by RSA private key.
The above mentioned PCR technique has numerous differ-
ent implications, such as Guangzhao Cui et. al. proposed a
encryption scheme with the aid of PCR amplification and DNA
coding schemes [6]. On the other hand, Tanaka et. al. devised a
public-key system using DNA as a one-way function for key
distribution using PCR amplification to restore the plaintext
DNA from other distractor DNA strands [12]. Yamamoto et.
al. also contributed in cryptography by producing large-scale
DNA memory based on the nested PCR [25]. This technique
of DNA cryptography provides two fold security by involving
both the molecular techniques and modern algorithms. If
one security level is broken some way, the other can keep
this technique safe [6]. However, the problem of PCR based
techniques lies in the transportation of secret keys between
the sender and receiver. Which has been discussed in detail in
Section IV.
B. Steganography using DNA
Steganography is the technique of hiding information. The
goal of cryptography is to make data unreadable by a third
party; on the other hand, the goal of steganography is to hide
the data from a third party. Formula shown at equation 1 is a
very generic description of the steganographic process:
covermedium + hiddendata + keystego = stegomedium (1)
In this context, the covermedium is the file in which the data,
hiddendata, is hid. The resultant file may also be encrypted
using another key called keystego. Finally, the stegomedium
is the file that will be transported. Usual, medium of covering
file may include the audio or image file. However, due to its
massive storage capability, DNA is getting popular to be a
steganographic covering medium.
The primitive idea of DNA steganography can be described
as follows. For encryption, one or more input DNA strands
are taken to be tagged as the plaintext message. One or more
randomly constructed secret key strands are appended with
the input DNA. Resulting ”tagged plaintext” DNA strands
are hidden by mixing them within many other additional
”distracter” DNA strands which might also be constructed
by random assembly. For decryption, given knowledge of
the ”secret key” strands, resolution of DNA strands can be
decrypted by a number of possible known recombinant DNA
separation methods. Such as plaintext message strands may
be separated out by hybridization with the complements of
the ”secret key” strands might be placed in solid support on
magnetic beads or on a prepared surface. These separation
steps may combined with amplification steps.
One such method is found in [26]. Viviana I. Risca proposed
a steganographic technique using DNA and standard biological
protocols. The proposed method encodes the information in
the sequence of DNA strand, flanked by two secret primer
target regions. The technique uses monoalphabetic encryption
key to assign random but unique 3-base DNA codons to 40
alpha-numeric and punctuation characters. The key was then
used to encode plaintext messages into the base sequence of
an artificially synthesized oligonucleotide.
The resultant DNA strand is then hidden into a very large
amount of similarly sized garbage DNA strands. To extract
the message, one must know the primers that will bind the
target regions on the message-containing DNA strand in order
to selectively amplify the required molecule.
Since, this primitive technique is simple and easily break-
able, an improvement is proposed by Asish Gehani et. al [15].
The idea is to distinguishing the probability distribution of
plaintext source from that of distracter DNA stands [15].
As it is discussed that DNA based steganography converts
plaintext into plain text DNA but do not encrypt it. It only
hides the plaintext DNA into bulk of other DNA and person
who knows the primer for it can easily locate the plaintext
DNA and amplify it. This technique can be very useful as it
saves the cost of encryption, but it is vulnerable to statistical
analysis. So the PCR based cryptography may be considered
to be much safer [6], [22].
C. DNA Chip Technology
A brief introduction to DNA chip technology is given to
clear the concept of this technique used in cryptography. Over
less than a decade, DNA chips and microarrays have changed
the way in which scientists carry out their investigations. DNA
chips enable researchers to manipulate the vast amounts of
data from genome-sequencing [27]. DNA chip technology
is very important for the manipulation of biological data.
It is commonly used to find expression of many genes in
parallel [11]. These chips like silicon chips can be used to
handle and store the data in the form of DNA sequences.
DNA chips consist of large number of spots embedded on
a solid surface, most commonly used is a glass slide. Each
spot consists of different kind and number of probes, where
probes are small nucleotide sequences which are able to bind
to the complimentary nucleotides. Nucleotides which bind to
these probes are fluorescently labelled, whenever any DNA
sequence binds to these probes, it is observed under a laser
dye and data is calculated electronically depending upon the
ratio of the binding of probe with the DNA in each spot [28],
[29]. Manufacturers are now developing smaller biochips with
better information handling capabilities that will contribute
more effectively to numerous fields of research including
cryptography.
Technique, considering the typical cryptographic scenario,
has following steps:
• Encryption key is a collection of particular probes where
decryption key is a collection of corresponding probes
having complimentary sequence. The decryption key is
then sent to the Bob in a secure manner.
• Plaintext is converted into a binary format. This binary
format is then embedded into DNA chip as a cipher text
(cipher DNA). Without knowing the decryption key one
cannot read the plaintext from the DNA chip.
• Bob uses the decryption key and hybridizes the cipher
DNA. With the help of a computer software he can
retrieve plain text [16].
One such cryptosystem is XOR One-time-pad [15]. To
construct one-time pad using DNA chip technology, an array
of immobilized DNA strands are used, where multiple copies
of a single sequence are grouped together in a microscopic
pixel. The strands are optically addressable. Distinct DNA
sequences at each optically addressable site of the array can
be synthesised using various methods. One of the known such
technologies is combinatorial synthesis conducted in parallel
at thousands of locations. For preparation of oligonucleotides
of length L, the 4L sequences are synthesized in 4n chemical
reactions.
To encrypt, each plaintext message has been appended with
a unique prefix index of length L0. A complement of the plain-
text message tag is created on one-time-pad DNA sequence
by appending unique prefix index tag of the same length
L0. Using annealing and ligation each of the corresponding
pair of plaintext message and a one-time-pad sequence is
concatenated. After that the message is encrypted by bit-wise
XOR mechanism. XOR operation is shown in Equation 2,
where C is the cipher data or strands, M is the plaintext
message and S is a sequence of independently distributed
random bits.
Ci = Mi ? Sifor = 1, , n. (2)
However, the fragments of the plaintext are converted to ci-
pher strands and plaintext strands are dropped. For decryption
commutative property of bit-wise XOR operation is used, as
shown in Equation 4-5.
Ci ? Si = (Mi ? Si)? Si (3)
= Mi ? (Si ? Si) (4)
= Mi. (5)
MingXin et. al. used DNA chip technology in a similar
manner as described above to design a symmetric key encryp-
tion scheme, they referred this encryption scheme as DNA
symmetric-key cryptosystem (DNASC) [16]. Recently Lai et.
al. proposed an asymmetric encryption scheme using DNA
chip technology and they also designed signatures using this
DNA chip technology so that Alice and Bob can verify each
other [30].
The encryption technique using DNA chip technology is not
restricted to encrypt only textual data, there are also encryption
schemes which are designed to encrypt and decrypt images.
One such cryptosystem is designed by Gehani et. al. where
they produced a substitution one-time-pad system and used it
during the process of encryption and decryption of 2D images.
It is noteworthy that they also performed PCR to amplify
particular DNA strands [15]. Similar technique is also noticed
in Shyam et. al.’s work, where they proposed a cryptosystem
and created plaintext and cipher text pairs using DNA chip
technology but on images [31].
Although DNA chip provides a wide range of parallel data
processing capability, the lack of interoperability of DNA chip
and other storage mediums supressed its potentiality at this
moment.
IV. SCOPE OF RESEARCH
There are many advantages which seem to be associated to
the field of DNA cryptography. The huge storage capacity of
DNA makes it a very tempting field for research. Moreover
the cryptographic techniques which are designed by involving
this field are believed to give very high security level [6].
The research which has been done so far on DNA cryptogra-
phy shows that several DNA-based methods can be devised in
order to break cryptosystems which are currently being used.
Many cryptosystems used today are based on RSA public
key encryption. RSA public key encryption is based on the
intractability of prime factorization as there are no known
efficient algorithms to find the prime factors of sufficiently
large numbers. As shown in Equation 6 -
n = p ? q (6)
where p and q are prime numbers, for a given ”n” it is
infeasible to find p and q when n is a very large number. If
there is any technique that can find how to factor given ”n”,
the whole RSA scheme will be broken. There are techniques
which have been devised to break RSA scheme in DNA
cryptography. These techniques used self-assembly of DNA
tiles to fully break RSA scheme [32], [9]. If these techniques
are able to break RSA, RSA will no more remain practical.
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) has been applied in key
exchange and also in the digital signatures. The security of
these cryptosystems is based on the difficulty of solving the
elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem [33]. DNA-based
methods have been developed to break the cryptosystems
based on elliptic curves. These methods are accomplished by
means of basic biological operations and have developed a
parallel multiplier; a parallel divider and a parallel adder for
adding points on elliptic curves [34].
The encryption schemes (Ciphers) that uses keys only once
are said to be one-time pads (OTP). In theory OTP cipher
is absolutely secure. But practically, key distribution and key
generation are critical issues to be resolved for the use of OTP
ciphers. Key space should be large enough so that keys can
only be used once. DNA having huge storage capacity, can be
manipulated to generate key space to be used for OTP cipher.
There are also some areas that need to be improved. For
example, Time and computational complexity are two of the
most important parameters for any kind of cryptographic
systems, DNA cryptography dealing with the manipulation
of DNA sequences takes a lot of time to deal and work out
with DNA sequences as compared to time taken by many very
efficient algorithms of traditional cryptography such as, DES,
RSA etc. [8], [9].
There is also a risk associated to DNA cryptography that if
the cipher DNA gets impured by unwanted DNAs, this process
may collapse. This may be handled by taking precautions and
maintaining the laboratory environment pure. Still research
must be carried on to address the reliability issues.
To summarise the whole discussion, following points are
significant.
1) In cryptographic technique involving PCR technology,
it can be examined that there are two encryption keys
and two decryption keys. One pair of encryption and
decryption key is (n , e) pair which was used for RSA
public key cryptosystem. The other pair was the forward
and reverse primers used for tagging the cipher DNA.
These primers were necessary to be securely shared
among Alice and Bob as DNA can only be recovered
if these primer pairs were known. This means that in
addition to the public and private keys, primer pairs are
also to be secretly transported. In public key encryption
there is only one secret which is shared that is the Bob’s
private key. However in this technique primer pairs are
also to be secretly transported [6]. The transport of
primers is not as simple as for the transport of keys
of the traditional cryptographic techniques.
Primer pairs are the sequences of nucleotides; there is
a probability that these molecules can be affected by
environmental conditions. To take account of this, envi-
ronmental conditions should be maintained throughout
the process of transport.
Another possibility is that the sequence of primer pair
in the form of A,C,T,G can be sent as digital form to the
Bob, same as the manner in which keys of traditional
cryptographic techniques are transported. Then Bob can
synthesize his own primer pairs in the laboratory con-
sidering the sequence which is sent to him by Alice.
During all this process environmental conditions should
remain stable.
2) DNA steganography system can be the complement of
the traditional DNA cryptography, however, potential
limitations of DNA steganography methods is its vul-
nerability. Certain DNA steganography systems can be
broken, with some assumptions on information theoretic
entropy of plaintext messages. May be the method is
brute force, but cannot be ruled out because of the
advancement of computing technologies. To make the
situation better, plaintext messages can be compressed
before encrypting, however, in this case, plaintext mes-
sages need to be pre-processed. So the open question is
whether DNA steganography systems with natural DNA
plaintext input can or cannot be made to be unbreakable.
The process of DNA steganography involves the tagging
of plaintext DNA with the primers and is hid in other
garbage or junk DNA of same length as the plaintext
DNA. This is a very simple method to provide confi-
dentiality. Same issue can arise here if the environmental
conditions change the binding property of DNA with the
primer. There is also a possibility that other garbage
DNA can bind to the primer, making it difficult to
recover the original plaintext DNA [6], [22].
3) DNA chips contains arrays of Pico moles of DNA
sequences, known as probes. Since an array can contain
huge number of probes, a DNA chip can accomplish
number of computation in parallel. However, DNA chip
data is difficult to exchange between traditional storage
medium, due to the lack of standardization in fabrica-
tion, protocols, and analysis methods [35]. This problem
is defined as interoperability problem in bioinformatics.
Moreover by examining the DNA chip technology used
in the DNA cryptography, it is seen that encryption
and decryption processes are performed on DNA chip.
DNA being a biological molecule; whose properties
are dependent on the environmental conditions. For
instance, DNA’s property to bind to other nucleotides
can be changed by changing environmental conditions.
So encryption and decryption process does not remain
stable. Due to this instability, encryption and decryption
may show different results under different environmental
conditions.
In short it can be said that DNA cryptography cannot totally
be replaced traditional cryptography which is currently being
used. This field requires a lot of research and work to have a
position in which it can be implemented and used for practical
purposes. There is a need that people from traditional cryp-
tography and DNA technology should exchange knowledge
among each other and cryptosystems should be devised in such
a way that they can enjoy benefit from both the fields.
V. CONCLUSION
DNA cryptography is a relatively new cryptographic field of
research evolved with the DNA computing. In this particular
field, DNA is used as message carrier and the bio-technology
such as PCR, is used as the implementation mechanism. The
extravagant storage capability and parallel computability of
DNA molecules are exploited for encryption, authentication,
and authorization. In this paper, the existing DNA crypto-
graphic techniques namely Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR),
Steganography using DNA and DNA chip technology have
been discussed. With the summarization of the progress of
DNA cryptographic research, the advantages, future trends and
several problems have also been identified. All the three kinds
of cryptography have their own advantages and disadvantages
and can be treated as the complement of each other in future
security applications. However, the difficulties that are identi-
fied in DNA cryptography are the absence of theoretical basis
and practical methodologies which can readily be implemented
in the field of security.
The potentiality of DNA on computing can open up further
biological molecule based computation methods. Once the
DNA cryptography field is developed and analysed, attempts
can be made to convert the cipher DNA into cipher proteins
or RNA, these can give us another level of security. It will
be possible only by intensive research and practical work on
DNA computing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Erasmus Mundus project eLINK - east-west Link for
Innovation, Networking and Knowledge exchange programme
(EM ECW SGA2008-4949) for funding this study.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Adleman, “Molecular computation of solutions to combinatorial prob-
lems,” Science, JSTOR, vol. 266, pp. 1021–1025, 1994.
[2] G. Cui, Y. Liu, and X. Zhang, “New direction of data storage: DNA
molecular storage technology,” Computer Engineering and Application,
vol. 42, no. 26, pp. 29–32, 2006.
[3] J. Chen, “A DNA-based, biomolecular cryptography design,” in IEEE
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2003, pp.
822–825.
[4] R. Barish, P. Rothemund, and E. Winfree, “Two computational primitives
for algorithmic self-assembly: copying and counting,” Nano Letters,
vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 2586–2592, 2005.
[5] P. Rothemund, N. Papadakis, and E. Winfree, “Algorithmic self-assembly
of DNA sierpinski triangles,” PLoS Biology, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 2041–
2053, 2004.
[6] G. Cui, L. Qin, Y. Wang, and X. Zhang, “An encryption scheme
using DNA technology,” in IEEE 3rd International conference on Bio-
Inspired Computing: Theories and Applications (BICTA08), Adelaid, SA,
Australia, 2008, pp. 37–42.
[7] D. Boneh, C. Dunworth, and R. Lipton, “Breaking DES using a molecular
computer,” in In Proceedings of DIMACS workshop on DNA computing,
1995, pp. 37–65.
[8] D. Beaver, “Factoring: The DNA solution,” in 4th International Con-
ferences on the Theory and Applications of Cryptology. Wollongong,
Australia: Springer-Verlag, Nov. 1994, pp. 419–423.
[9] Y. Brun, “Arithmetic computation in the tile assembly model: Addition
and multiplication,” Theoritical Computer Science, Science Direct, Else-
vier, vol. 378, no. 1, pp. 17–31, 2007.
[10] O. Pelletier and A. Weimerskirch, “Algorithmic self-assembly of DNA
tiles and its application to cryptanalysis,” in Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evo- lutionary Computation Conference 2002 (GECCO02), New
York, USA, 2002, pp. 139–146.
[11] X. C. Zhang, “Breaking the NTRU public key cryptosystem using self-
assembly of DNA tilings,” Chinese Journal of Computers, vol. 12, pp.
2129–2137, 2008.
[12] T. Kazuo, O. Akimitsu, and S. Isao, “Public-key system using DNA as
a one-way function for key distribution,” BioSystems, Elsevier Science,
vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 25–29, 2005.
[13] N. Galbreath, Cryptography for Internet and Database Applications:
Developing Secret and Public Key Techniques with Java. New York,
USA: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2002.
[14] A. Menezes, P. Oorschot, and S. Vanstone, Handbook of applied
cryptography. CRC Press, 1996.
[15] A. Gehani, T. LaBean, and J. Reif, DNA based cryptography. Germany:
Aspects of Moleculer Computing, Springer-Verlag., 2004.
[16] L. MingXin, L. XueJia, X. GuoZhen, and Q. Lei, “Symmetric-key cryp-
tosystem with DNA technology,” Science in China Series F: Information
Sciences, Springer Verlag, Germany, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 324–333, 2007.
[17] L. H. N. C. for Biomedical Communications, Handbook on Genetic
Cells and DNA. USA: National Library of Medicine, National Institutes
of Health, Department of Health and Human Services., 2010.
[18] M. Zhang, L. Sabharwal, and W. Tao, “Interactive DNA sequence
and structure design for DNA nanoapplications,” IEEE Transactions on
Nanobioscience, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 286–292, Dec. 2004.
[19] J. Watson and F. Crick, “A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid,”
Nature, vol. 171, pp. 737–738, Apr. 1953.
[20] X. Guozhen, L. Mingxin, Q. Lei, and L. Xuejia, “New field of cryp-
tography: DNA cryptography,” Chinese Sience Bulletin, Springer Verlag,
Germany, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 1413–1420, 2006.
[21] A. Leier, C. Richter, W. Banzhaf, and H. Rauhe, “Cryptography with
DNA binary strands,” BioSystems, Elsevier Science, vol. 57, no. 1, pp.
13–22, 2000.
[22] G. Cui, L. Cuiling, L. Haobin, and L. Xiaoguang, “DNA computing and
its application to information security field,” in IEEE Fifth International
Conference on Natural Computation, Tianjian, China, Aug. 2009.
[23] Farnel. (2010) Silicon storage technology - sst25vf016b-50-4i-
s2af - 16m flash memory, spi eeprom, soic8. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://uk.farnell.com/silicon-storage-technology/sst25vf016b-50-4i-
s2af/16m-flash-memory-spi-eeprom-soic8/dp/1368695
[24] A. A. Jabri, “A statistical decoding algorithm for general linear block
codes,” in 8th IMA International Conference on Cryptography and
Coding, Cirencester, UK, Dec. 2001, pp. 1–8.
[25] M. Yamamoto, S. Kashiwamura, A. Ohuchi, and M. Furukawa, “Large-
scale dna memory based on the nested pcr,” Natural Computing, an
international journal, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 335–346, 2008.
[26] V. I. Risca, “DNA-based steganography,” Cryptologia, Tylor and Fran-
cis, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 37–49, 2001.
[27] P. Gwynne and G. Heebner, “Technologies in DNA chips and microar-
rays: I,” Science, vol. 4 May, p. 949, 2001.
[28] T. Tsukahara and H. Nagasawa, “Probe-on-carriers for oligonucleotide
microarrays (DNA chips),” Science and Technology of Advanced Materi-
als, Elsevier Science, vol. 5, pp. 359–362, 2004.
[29] P. Brown and D. Botstein, “Exploring the new world of the genome
with DNA microarrays,” Nature Genetics, vol. 21, pp. 33–37, 1999.
[30] L. XueJia, L. MingXin, Q. Lei, H. JunSong4, and F. XiWen1, “Asym-
metric encryption and signature method with dna technology,” SCIENCE
CHINA Information Sciences, vol. 53, pp. 506–514, 2010.
[31] V. M. M. Shyam, N. Kiran, “A novel encryption scheme based on
dna computing,” in 14th IEEE International Conference, Tia, India, Dec.
2007.
[32] Y. Brun, “Nondeterministic polynomial time factoring in the tile assem-
bly model,” Theoritical Computer Science, Science Direct, Elsevier, vol.
395, no. 1, pp. 3–23, Apr. 2008.
[33] V. S. Miller, “Use of elliptic curves in cryptography,” in 5th Annual
International Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO ’85), Santa Barbara,
Calif, USA, Aug. 1985, pp. 417–426.
[34] K. Li, S. Zou, and J. Xv, “Fast parallel molecular algorithms for DNA-
based computation: Solving the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem
over gf(2n),” Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, Hindawi., vol.
2008, pp. 1–10, Apr. 2008.
[35] J. Fuscoe, W. Branham, C. Melvin, V. Desai, C. Moland, T. Han, L. Shi,
W. Tong, A. Scully, and R. Delongchamp, “Technical issues involved
in obtaining reliable data from microarray experiments,” Regulatory
Research Perspective, National Center for Toxicological Research, USA,
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2006.
